Submission format: 
- Submissions should start with a title page consisting of the title of the paper, no author information 
    (see below), and an abstract of a few paragraphs summarizing the paper's contributions. 
- There is no page limit and authors are encouraged to use the "full version" of their paper as the submission.
- Each submission should contain within the initial ten pages following the title page a clear presentation
    of the merits of the paper, including a discussion of the paper's importance within the context of prior 
    work and a description of the key technical and conceptual ideas used to achieve its main claims. 
- This part of the submission should be addressed to a broad spectrum of theoretical computer science
     researchers, not solely to experts in the subarea. 
- Proofs must be provided that can enable the main mathematical claims of the paper to be fully verified.

Although there is no bound on the length of a submission, material other than the abstract, table of contents,
and the first ten pages will be read at the committee's discretion.
Authors are encouraged to put the references at the very end of the submission.
The submission should be typeset using 11-point or larger fonts, in a single-column, single-space 
(between lines) format with ample spacing throughout and 1-inch margins all around, 
on letter-size (8 1/2 x 11 inch) paper.
Submissions deviating significantly from these guidelines risk rejection without consideration of their merits.

STOC 2025 will use double-blind reviewing, and as such, submissions should not reveal the identity
of the authors in any way. In particular, authors' names, affiliations, and email addresses should not 
appear at the beginning or in the body of the submission. Authors should not include obvious references 
that reveal their own identity, and should ensure that any references to their own related work are in 
the third person (e.g., not "We build on our previous work…" but rather "We build on the work of…").

The purpose of this double-blind process is to help PC members and external reviewers come to an initial 
judgment about the paper without bias, and not to make it impossible for them to discover who the authors
are if they were to try. (In particular, to manage Conflicts Of Interests, author information will be 
available to the PC Chair, and possibly to a small set of PC Members on an as-needed basis.) 
Nothing should be done in the name of anonymity that weakens the submission or makes the job of 
reviewing the paper more difficult. In particular, important references should not be omitted or anonymized. 
In addition, authors should feel free to disseminate their ideas or draft versions of their paper 
as they normally would. For example, authors may post drafts of their papers on the web, submit them to arXiv,
and give talks on their research ideas.

All submissions will be treated as confidential, and will only be disclosed to the committee and their 
chosen sub-referees. In addition, the program committee may consult with journal editors and program 
chairs of other conferences about controversial issues such as parallel submissions. 
